bpo-43510: Implement PEP 597 opt-in EncodingWarning. (#19481)
python/cpython: Doc/library/io.rst

The raw stream API is described in detail in the docs of :class:`RawIOBase`.

.. _io-text-encoding:

Text Encoding
-------------

The default encoding of :class:`TextIOWrapper` and :func:`open` is
locale-specific (:func:`locale.getpreferredencoding(False) <locale.getpreferredencoding>`).

> But many developers forget to specify encoding when opening text files
> encoded in UTF-8 (e.g. JSON, TOML, Markdown, etc...) since most Unix
> platforms uses UTF-8 locale by default. It cause a bug because locale-specific
> encoding is not UTF-8 for most Windows users. For example::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, many developers forget to specify the encoding when opening text files
encoded in UTF-8 (e.g. JSON, TOML, Markdown, etc...) since most Unix
platforms use UTF-8 locale by default. This causes bugs because the locale
encoding is not UTF-8 for most Windows users. For example::
```

Fix multiple grammar errors (missing articles, agreement issues, incomplete sentences)

>    # may not work on Windows when non-ASCII characters in the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # May not work on Windows when non-ASCII characters in the file.
```

   with open("README.md") as f:
       long_description = f.read()

> Additionally, Python may change the default text encoding to UTF-8 in the
> future, although there is no plan yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, while there is no concrete plan as of yet, Python may change
the default text file encoding to UTF-8 in the future.
```

Use clearer and more idiomatic phrasing and diction, and specify that this is the "file" encoding, as opposed to the many other default encodings (console, filesystem, source, etc)

> So it is highly recommended to specify encoding explicitly when opening text
> files. If you want to use UTF-8, specify ``encoding="utf-8"``. If you need to
> use locale-specific encoding, ``encoding="locale"`` is supported since Python
> 3.10.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accordingly, it is highly recommended that you specify the encoding
explicitly when opening text files. If you want to use UTF-8, pass 
``encoding="utf-8"``. To use the current locale encoding,
``encoding="locale"`` is supported in Python 3.10.
```

Fix more grammar issues as above, avoid repetition/poor phrasing and clarify the description of the `"locale"` argument

> When you need to run code using the default encoding to open UTF-8 files on
> Windows, you can enable the UTF-8 mode. See also the
> :ref:`UTF-8 mode on Windows <win-utf8-mode>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you need to run existing code on Windows that attempts to opens
UTF-8 files using the default locale encoding, you can enable the UTF-8
mode. See :ref:`UTF-8 mode on Windows <win-utf8-mode>`.
```

It wasn't fully clear what the intended use case for this was over just modifying the code, so I took my best guess, as well as fixed more grammar issues, clarified the prose and avoided ambiguous phrasing/structure.

.. _io-encoding-warning:

Opt-in EncodingWarning
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 3.10
   See :pep:`597` for more details.

> To find where the default encoding is used, you can use
> a ``-X warn_default_encoding`` command line argument or a
> :envvar:`PYTHONWARNDEFAULTENCODING` environment variable to emit
> an :exc:`EncodingWarning` when the defaut encoding is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find where the default locale encoding is used, you can enable
the ``-X warn_default_encoding`` command line option or set the
:envvar:`PYTHONWARNDEFAULTENCODING` environment variable, which will
emit an :exc:`EncodingWarning` when the default encoding is used.
```

Fix typos, articles and repetition, and clarify terms

If you are providing APIs using :func:`open` or :class:`TextIOWrapper` and
having ``encoding=None`` parameter, you can use :func:`text_encoding` to emit
an :exc:`EncodingWarning` to the user too. But please consider using UTF-8

> by default (i.e. ``encoding="utf-8"``).

Reviewer: ```
If you are providing an API that uses :func:`open` or
:class:`TextIOWrapper` and passes ``encoding=None`` as a parameter, you
can use :func:`text_encoding` to emit an :exc:`EncodingWarning` to the
user too. However, please consider using UTF-8 by default
(i.e. ``encoding="utf-8"``).
```

Fix a few grammar issues (agreement, articles, incomplete sentences)

Author: > "to the user too. "

This is a bit misleading. When a function wrapping `open()` uses `encoding = io.text_encoding(encoding)`, the function is not warned. Only caller of the function will be warned.

Reviewer: Okay, thanks. I've tried to clarify it accordingly; is this better?

```suggestion
If you are providing an API that uses :func:`open` or
:class:`TextIOWrapper` and passes ``encoding=None`` as a parameter, you
can use :func:`text_encoding` so that callers of the API will emit an
:exc:`EncodingWarning` if they don't pass an ``encoding``. However,
please consider using UTF-8 by default (i.e. ``encoding="utf-8"``) for
new APIs.
```

The raw stream API is described in detail in the docs of :class:`RawIOBase`.

.. _io-text-encoding:

Text Encoding
-------------

The default encoding of :class:`TextIOWrapper` and :func:`open` is
locale-specific (:func:`locale.getpreferredencoding(False) <locale.getpreferredencoding>`).

However, many developers forget to specify the encoding when opening text files
encoded in UTF-8 (e.g. JSON, TOML, Markdown, etc...) since most Unix
platforms use UTF-8 locale by default. This causes bugs because the locale
encoding is not UTF-8 for most Windows users. For example::

   # May not work on Windows when non-ASCII characters in the file.
   with open("README.md") as f:
       long_description = f.read()

Additionally, while there is no concrete plan as of yet, Python may change
the default text file encoding to UTF-8 in the future.

Accordingly, it is highly recommended that you specify the encoding

> explicitly when opening text files. If you want to use UTF-8, pass 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
explicitly when opening text files. If you want to use UTF-8, pass
```

Fix the doc checks failing due to trailing whitespace (could have been my mistake in a previous suggestion, sorry)

   .. versionadded:: 3.8

.. function:: text_encoding(encoding, stacklevel=1)

   This is a helper function for functions that use :func:`open` or
   :class:`TextIOWrapper` and take ``encoding=None`` option.

   This function returns *encoding* if it is not ``None`` and "locale" if
   *encoding* is ``None``.

   This function emits an :class:`EncodingWarning` if

>    ``sys.flags.warn_default_encoding`` is true. *stacklevel* specifies where

Reviewer 2: Trick to get a link:

```suggestion
   :data:`sys.flags.warn_default_encoding <sys.flags>` is true. *stacklevel* specifies where
```

The warning is only emited if the encoding is None, no?

>    ``sys.flags.warn_default_encoding`` is true. *stacklevel* specifies where

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   ``sys.flags.warn_default_encoding`` is true and *encoding* is None. *stacklevel* specifies where
```

   .. versionadded:: 3.8

.. function:: text_encoding(encoding, stacklevel=2)

   This is a helper function for functions that use :func:`open` or
   :class:`TextIOWrapper` and take ``encoding=None`` argument.

   This function returns *encoding* if it is not ``None`` and "locale" if
   *encoding* is ``None``.

   This function emits an :class:`EncodingWarning` if
   :data:`sys.flags.warn_default_encoding <sys.flags>` is true and *encoding*
   is None. *stacklevel* specifies where the warning is emit for. For
   example::

      def read_text(path, encoding=None):
          encoding = io.text_encoding(encoding)  # stacklevel=2
          with open(path, encoding) as f:
              return f.read()

   In this example, an :class:`EncodingWarning` is emit for the caller of the

>    ``read_text()``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This is a helper function for callables that use :func:`open` or
   :class:`TextIOWrapper` and have an ``encoding=None`` parameter.

   This function returns *encoding* if it is not ``None`` and ``"locale"`` if
   *encoding* is ``None``.

   This function emits an :class:`EncodingWarning` if
   :data:`sys.flags.warn_default_encoding <sys.flags>` is true and *encoding*
   is None. *stacklevel* specifies where the warning is emitted.
   For example::

      def read_text(path, encoding=None):
          encoding = io.text_encoding(encoding)  # stacklevel=2
          with open(path, encoding) as f:
              return f.read()

   In this example, an :class:`EncodingWarning` is emitted for the caller of
   ``read_text()``.
```

Fix a number of grammar errors, mostly related to definite/indefinite articles

   *encoding* gives the name of the encoding that the stream will be decoded or
   encoded with.  It defaults to
   :func:`locale.getpreferredencoding(False) <locale.getpreferredencoding>`.
   ``encoding="locale"`` can be used to specify the locale specific encoding

>    explicitly. See :ref:`io-text-encoding` for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``encoding="locale"`` can be used to specify the current locale's encoding
   explicitly. See :ref:`io-text-encoding` for more information.
```

Clarify text and avoid repetition

      locale encoding using :func:`locale.setlocale`, use the current locale
      encoding instead of the user preferred encoding.

   .. versionchanged:: 3.10

>       *encoding* option now supports ``"locale"`` dummy encoding name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      The *encoding* argument now supports the ``"locale"`` dummy encoding name.
```

Add missing definite article and use correct terminology (arguably this should be parameter, but argument is retained for consistency with the previous). Also, I'm not sure about calling the `"locale"` encoding name a "dummy", since it does refer to an actual (albeit dynamic) encoding.

Author: How about `the "locale" option` instead of `the "locale" dummy encoding name`?
